What is known as Heart Disease?
Heart disease describes a range of conditions that affect your heart. 
Heart diseases include: Blood vessel disease, such as coronary artery disease, Heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias), Heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects), Heart valve disease, Disease of the heart muscle, Heart infection
When to see a doctor?
Seek emergency medical care if you have these heart disease signs and symptoms- 
1. Chest pain 
2. Shortness of breath 
3. Fainting 
Always call 911 or emergency medical help if you think you might be having a heart attack.
How the heart works?
Your heart is a pump. It's a muscular organ about the size of your fist, located slightly left of center in your chest. Your heart is divided into the right and the left sides. The right side of the heart includes the right atrium and ventricle. It collects and pumps blood to the lungs through the pulmonary arteries. The lungs give the blood a new supply of oxygen. The lungs also breathe out carbon dioxide, a waste product. Oxygen-rich blood then enters the left side of the heart, including the left atrium and ventricle. The left side of the heart pumps blood through the largest artery in the body (aorta) to supply tissues throughout the body with oxygen and nutrients.
What is Heart valves?
Four heart valves keep your blood moving the right way by opening only one way and only when they need to. To work properly, the valves must be formed properly, must open all the way and must close tightly so there's no leakage. The four valves are: 1. Tricuspid 2. Mitral 3. Pulmonary 4. Aortic
What is known as Heartbeats?
A beating heart squeezes (contracts) and relaxes in a continuous cycle. During contraction (systole), your ventricles squeeze tight, forcing blood into the vessels to your lungs and body. During relaxation (diastole), the ventricles are filled with blood coming from the upper chambers (left and right atria).
Causes of heart infection 
A heart infection, such as endocarditis, is caused when germs reach your heart muscle. The most common causes of heart infection include: 1. Bacteria 2. Viruses 3. Parasites
Risk factors for developing heart disease 
1. Age : Growing older increases your risk of damaged and narrowed arteries and a weakened or thickened heart muscle. 2. Sex : Men are generally at greater risk of heart disease. The risk for women increases after menopause. 3. Family history : A family history of heart disease increases your risk of coronary artery disease, especially if a parent developed it at an early age (before age 55 for a male relative, such as your brother or father, and 65 for a female relative, such as your mother or sister). 4. Smoking : Nicotine tightens your blood vessels, and carbon monoxide can damage their inner lining, making them more susceptible to atherosclerosis. Heart attacks are more common in smokers than in nonsmokers. 5. Poor diet : A diet that's high in fat, salt, sugar and cholesterol can contribute to the development of heart disease.
Complications of heart disease 
1. Heart failure : One of the most common complications of heart disease, heart failure occurs when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs. Heart failure can result from many forms of heart disease, including heart defects, cardiovascular disease, valvular heart disease, heart infections or cardiomyopathy. 2. Heart attack : A blood clot blocking the blood flow through a blood vessel that feeds the heart causes a heart attack, possibly damaging or destroying a part of the heart muscle. Atherosclerosis can cause a heart attack. 3. Stroke : The risk factors that lead to cardiovascular disease can also lead to an ischemic stroke, which happens when the arteries to your brain are narrowed or blocked so that too little blood reaches your brain. A stroke is a medical emergency — brain tissue begins to die within just a few minutes of a stroke.
Prevention of Heart Disease
Certain types of heart disease, such as heart defects, can't be prevented. However, the same lifestyle changes that can improve your heart disease can help you prevent it, including: 1. Don't smoke. 2. Control other health conditions, such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes. 3. Exercise at least 30 minutes a day on most days of the week. 4. Eat a diet that's low in salt and saturated fat. 5. Maintain a healthy weight. 6. Reduce and manage stress. 7. Practice good hygiene.
What are the warning signs of heart disease?
Heart disease can manifest as chest pain, tightness, or discomfort. Sometimes even shortness of breath can be a symptom of a heart attack. Any unusual restriction in your activity could be a warning sign of heart disease. Dizziness or a fast or irregular heartbeat are other possible symptoms.
Does smoking increase your risk of heart disease?
Smoking is a major risk for several diseases including heart disease, stroke, and several cancers. Even low-tar cigarettes and light smoking can increase the risk of heart disease substantially. There are now several alternative approaches to helping people stop smoking. These include nicotine-replacement patches and gum as well as oral medication. If you are able to stop smoking, your risk of a heart attack or stroke decreases within a few weeks. The risk goes down to that of a nonsmoker within about two years. In addition, a lot of patients comment that they feel healthier and have more energy after they’ve stopped smoking.
Is hypothyroidism a risk factor?
Hypothyroidism can increase blood cholesterol levels and that contributes to heart disease; however, if the hypothyroidism is being treated with a thyroid hormone, then the cholesterol returns to normal.
Are birth control pills a contributor to heart disease?
Birth control pills can cause a small increase in the risk of thrombosis and heart attack. That occurs mainly in people who have been on the pill for more than 10 years and who smoke cigarettes.
Does being overweight increase the risk of heart disease?
Being overweight can increase the risk of heart disease in several ways. There can be a ten-fold increase in risks of high blood pressure and diabetes. In addition, being overweight will decrease the HDL or “good” cholesterol, which is now recognized as a major risk factor. If you are overweight, it is important to diet and exercise in order to lose weight and reduce these risk factors.
Is salt bad for your heart?
Salt in the diet can cause an increase in blood pressure in some patients. For that reason doctors usually recommend that salt intake be restricted to moderate levels. It is particularly important to watch salt intake if a patient has high blood pressure that is not controlled with usual therapy. Many foods, such as potato chips, peanuts, and ready-made meals, have very high salt content.
Signs and symptoms of Heart Disease
1. Chest pain, chest tightness, chest pressure and chest discomfort (angina) 2. Shortness of breath 3. Pain, numbness, weakness or coldness in your legs or arms if the blood vessels in those parts of your body are narrowed 4. Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper abdomen or back.
What Is Atherosclerosis?
Atherosclerosis is also called hardening of the arteries. When the lining inside an artery is damaged, fat and plaque build up. This causes the artery walls to thicken, and the blood vessel narrows or sometimes gets blocked.
What's the Link Between Smoking and Heart Disease?
About 30% of deaths from heart disease in the U.S. are directly related to cigarette smoking. Smoking is a major cause of atherosclerosis. Among other things, the nicotine in smoke causes: 1. Less oxygen to the heart 2. Higher blood pressure and heart rate 3. More blood clotting 4. Damage to cells that line coronary arteries and other blood vessels
What Is Cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a soft, waxy material made in the liver. It’s in foods such as egg yolks, milk fat, organ meats, and shellfish. You can lower your high cholesterol levels by eating foods low in saturated fats, sugar, and calories.
How Common Is Heart Disease Among Women?
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women over 40 years old, especially after menopause. Once a woman reaches the age of 50 (about the age of natural menopause), the risk for heart disease increases dramatically. In young women who have undergone early or surgical menopause, the risk for heart disease is also higher.
Tips to prevent heart disease
1. Eat more vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and legumes. 2. Cut trans fats from your diet.Swap saturated fats for unsaturated ones. 3. Eat lean sources of protein, such as chicken, fish, and soy. Avoid red meat, as this tends to be high in fat and cholesterol. 4. Eat complex carbohydrates such as whole-grain bread, rice, and pasta and limit simple carbohydrates such as regular soda, sugar, and sweets. 5. Cut down on salt. 6. Exercise regularly.
Can stress cause heart disease?
Stress can increase the risk of heart disease, although we still do not know how this happens. A sudden physical or emotional stress can certainly lead to an episode of angina or even a heart attack.
How is heart disease related to strokes?
Heart disease is commonly caused by atherosclerosis (hardening and blockage of the arteries), and this process can also cause strokes. Most strokes are due to a blood clot that forms either in the brain or travels from a narrowed artery in the neck. We know that treating risk factors for atherosclerosis can reduce both heart attacks and stroke. For example, cholesterol lowering can reduce the risk of a stroke by about 25 percent.
What happens if heart disease is left untreated? 
If heart disease is not treated, it can cause severe angina, heart failure with shortness of breath on even mild activities. The risk of death is increased. Most physicians are now very familiar with treating heart disease, so it does not often go untreated.
Will taking an aspirin a day reduce the risk of heart disease?
Aspirin may be helpful for patients who have already had a heart attack, stroke, atherosclerosis in other blood vessels, or who have diabetes or well-controlled hypertension. Aspirin has been shown to reduce the risk of heart attack and stroke by about 25 percent when taken in a dose of 325 mg or less a day. However, even low doses of aspirin can cause a slight increase in the risk of bleeding into the brain. For that reason, it is usually not recommended for low-risk patients who have not yet had a heart attack or stroke.
Can exercise really make your heart stronger?
Exercise has huge benefits. It reduces blood pressure and increases HDL, or good cholesterol. It improves the number of blood vessels in the heart and in the rest of the body. So exercise makes it less likely that you will have a heart attack and if you do have a heart attack, it's likely that it will be less severe. In addition, exercise is a very important component of any weight-loss program.
Are you a robot?
Yes, My name is Hearty
Are you a bot?
Yes, My name is Hearty
Are you a chatbot?
Yes, My name is Hearty
What is your name?
My name is Hearty
What do you do?
I am made to answer Heart Disease related  FAQs
Hello
Hi
Hi
Hey
What's up
Hello
Hey
I am glad! you are talking to me
thanks
You're welcome!
thank you
You're welcome!
 Bye!
Bye! Have a great time!

